# The `duqtools` config file

UQ run settings are configured using a yaml configuration file in the project directory. By default it is named `duqtools.yaml`. You can specify another path for it using the -c/--config option (see `duqtools help` or the [cli](../command-line-interface.md)).

As a minimum, this configuration file must define the root workspace and the system to use (see below). All other settings are (in principle) optional.


## Starting from scratch

To help initialize a starting config to modify, you can run [`duqtools init`](../command-line-interface.md#init).

Check out the different subpages of this section that explain the different parts of the config.

- [setup](../config/setup.md)
- [create](../config/create.md)
- [submit](../config/submit.md)
- [status](../config/status.md)
- [system](#defining-the-system)
- [variables](#extra-variables)

### Example config file

Below is an example config file generated by `duqtools init`.

```yaml title="duqtools.yaml"
{!../src/duqtools/data/duqtools.yaml!}
```

## Defining the system

Currently there are multiple systems available. They are distinguished by specifying the `system` field. Currently there are two options available:

Options:

- `None` or `nosystem` (default)
- `jetto` (see [jetto specific documentation](./jetto/index.md))

### Default (no system)

::: duqtools.systems.no_system.NoSystem
    options:
      show_root_toc_entry: false
      members: None
      show_bases: False

## Extra variables

Duqtools comes with a list of default [variables](../variables.md). You can update or add your own variables via the `extra_variables` key in the `duqtools.yaml` file.

### IDS variables

{{ schema_IDSVariableModel['description'] }}

{% for name, prop in schema_IDSVariableModel['properties'].items() %}
`{{ name }}`
: {{ prop['description'] }}
{% endfor %}

Example:

```yaml title="duqtools.yaml"
extra_variables:
- name: rho_tor_norm
  ids: core_profiles
  path: profiles_1d/*/grid/rho_tor_norm
  dims: [time, x]
  type: IDS-variable
- name: t_i_ave
  ids: core_profiles
  path: profiles_1d/*/t_i_ave
  dims: [time, x]
  type: IDS-variable
```

### Top level

These are the top level keywords in the config. See the specific sections for more information.

{% for name, prop in schema_ConfigModel['properties'].items() %}
`{{ name }}`
: {{ prop['description'] }}
{% endfor %}
